README.MD, before:

# Let's Chat - A Real-Time Chat Webapp.
---

Let's Chat is a full stack chat application that allows users to communicate with each other in real-time. It supports features like user authentication, one-on-one chat, group chat, user profile management, and more.

### If you find this project helpful, please consider giving it a star ⭐ and follow me on [GitHub](https://github.com/MehraDevesh2022) && [X](https://twitter.com/Iam_DEv22) for more exciting projects like this! 🚀

---
 
### ⚙️ &nbsp; Time Taken in Completion of Project : 
---
 <p align="center">
<a href="https://wakatime.com/badge/user/f7838f29-ea5b-42c9-a473-628c7d8bc934/project/27f6a565-9c39-4922-8a4e-343c26e814d4"><img src="https://wakatime.com/badge/user/f7838f29-ea5b-42c9-a473-628c7d8bc934/project/27f6a565-9c39-4922-8a4e-343c26e814d4.svg" alt="wakatime"></a>
</p>
 
**Tech Stack:**

[![MERN Stack](https://img.shields.io/badge/Stack-MERN-61DAFB?style=flat-square)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MERN_(software_bundle))
[![MongoDB](https://img.shields.io/badge/Database-MongoDB-47A248?style=flat-square)](https://www.mongodb.com/)
[![Express.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Backend-Express.js-000000?style=flat-square)](https://expressjs.com/)
[![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/Frontend-React-61DAFB?style=flat-square)](https://reactjs.org/)
[![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Backend-Node.js-339933?style=flat-square)](https://nodejs.org/)
[![Chakra UI](https://img.shields.io/badge/UI%20Framework-Chakra%20UI-319795?style=flat-square)](https://chakra-ui.com/)
[![CSS3](https://img.shields.io/badge/Styling-CSS3-1572B6?style=flat-square)](https://www.w3.org/Style/CSS/Overview.en.html)
[![Socket.IO](https://img.shields.io/badge/Web%20Sockets-Socket.IO-010101?style=flat-square)](https://socket.io/)

## Table of Contents 📜

 ## Demo 📸
![Demo](./gif/demo.gif)


## Table
- [Intro](#intro)
- [Sections](#sections)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Folder Structure](#folder-structure)
- [Setting Up .env in Backend](#setting-up-env-in-backend)
- [Hosting](#hosting)
- [Packages Used](#packages-used)
- [Upcoming Features](#upcoming-features)
- [Contribution Guidelines](#contribution-guidelines)

## Intro 📝

ChatMind is a chat application built with the MERN stack. It provides a seamless and real-time chatting experience for users. With features like user authentication, one-on-one chat, group chat, and user profile management, ChatMind offers a comprehensive solution for communication needs.

## Sections 🔖

- Home
  - Login Page
  - Sign Up Page
  - Forgot Password Page
- Chat Page
  - Search User
  - One-on-One Chat
  - Group Chat
  - User Profile
  - Group Menu





## Installation ⬇️

To run ChatMind locally, you will need to have Git and Node.js installed on your machine.

### Git

Download and install Git from the official website: [https://git-scm.com/downloads](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

### Node.js

Download and install Node.js from the official website: [https://nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org)

## Getting Started 🎯

To get started with ChatMind, follow these steps:

1. Fork and clone the repository from GitHub:
  
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/MehraDevesh2022/chat-mind.git
    ```


 ## Install the required packages for the backend by running the following command in the root directory:
 
   

    npm install 
    or 
    yarn add
  

## Install the required packages for the frontend by navigating to the frontend directory and running the following command:

  
    cd ./frontend 
    npm install
    or
    yarn add

## Run the backend server by running the following command in the root directory:
  
      npm start
      or
      yarn start

## Run the frontend server by navigating to the frontend directory and running the following command:
    
        cd ./frontend
        npm start
        or
        yarn start


        
    
## Folder Structure 📂

- backend
  - app.js
  - appUtils
    - error.js
    - jwtToken.js
  - controller
    - chatController.js
    - messageController.js
    - userController.js
  - db
    - connectDB.js
  - middleware
    - asyncWrapper.js
    - auth.js
    - errorHandler.js
  - model
    - ChatModel.js
    - MessageModel.js
    - UserModel.js
  - route
    - chatRoute.js
    - messageRoutes.js
    - userRoute.js
  - utils
    - .env
- frontend
  - build
    - asset-manifest.json
    - favicon.ico
    - index.html
    - logo192.png
    - logo512.png
    - manifest.json
    - robots.txt
  - public
    - favicon.ico
    - index.html
    - logo192.png
    - logo512.png
    - manifest.json
    - robots.txt
  - src
    - App.css
    - App.js
    - index.css
    - index.js
    - reportWebVitals.js 
  - animations 
    - typing.json 
  - components 
    - Chatbox.js 
    - ChatLoading.js 
    - EmojiOptions.js 
    - MyChats.js 
    - ScrollableChat.js 
    - SingleChat.js 
    - styles.css 
  - config 
    - ChatLogics.js 
  - Context 
    - ChatProvider.js 
  - img 
    - img.jpg 
  - Pages 
    - Chatpage.js 
    - Homepage.css 
    - Homepage.js

## Setting Up .env in Backend 🔧

To set up the environment variables for the backend, create a `.env` file inside the `backend/utils` directory with the following contents:

```bash

PORT=5000
DB_LINK=xxxx
JWT_SECRET=xxxx
JWT_EXPIRE=2d
COOKIE_EXPIRE=2
NODE_ENV=production
CLOUDINARY_NAME=xxxx
API_KEY=xxxx
API_SECRET=xxxx
CLOUDINARY_URL=xxxx

```

 - Make sure to replace `xxxx` with your actual values. 

## Hosting 🌐 at Railway.

1. Go to [https://railway.app/](https://railway.app/).
   - This is the Railway platform where you can host your applications.

2. Log in using your GitHub account.
   - Click on the login option and authenticate with your GitHub credentials.

3. Start a New Project.
   - Once you are logged in, click on "Start a New Project."

4. Add your GitHub repository.
   - Choose the repository of your MERN stack app that you want to deploy.

5. Deploy your app.
   - After adding the repository, select the repository you want to deploy.

6. Configure environment variables.
   - If your app requires environment variables (such as API keys, database credentials, etc.), navigate to the variables section and enter them there.

7. Paste the `.env` file content.
   - If your app uses an `.env` file locally, copy and paste its contents into the Railway platform's environment variable section.

8. Generate the domain.
   - Go to the settings and generate a domain for your deployed app.

9. You're all set to go!
   - Your MERN stack app is now deployed and accessible using the generated domain.

- **Railway Platform**: [https://chat-mind-production.up.railway.app/signup)



## Hosting 🌐
ChatMind can be hosted using the Render platform. Follow these steps to deploy ChatMind:  [https://chat-mind-3pcx.onrender.com/](https://chat-mind-3pcx.onrender.com/)

 1. Build the frontend by running the following command in the frontend directory: `npm run build`
 2.  Add the following deployment code to the `app.js` file in the backend directory:  
 

 ```javascript 
  // -----deployment code----- 

const path = require("path");
const __dirname1 = path.resolve(); 
if (process.env.NODE_ENV === "production") {
  
   app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname1, "/frontend/build"))); 
   app.get("*", (req, res) => res.sendFile( path.resolve(__dirname1, "frontend", "build", "index.html") ) );

 }
 else {

  app.get("/", (req, res) => { res.send("API is running..");

   }); 
   }

  // -----deployment code ends-----
  ```
3 Push the code to a Git repository (GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket).
4 Sign up for Render and select "Web Services" from the dashboard.
5 Choose the repository from GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket.
6 Add a project name and select the runtime as Node.
7 Set the build command to npm install or yarn install.
8 Set the start command to node backend/app.js or npm start or yarn start.
9 Go to the "Advanced" tab and add all the environment keys and their corresponding values from the .env file.
10 Create the web service.
11 Once the web service is created, go to the "Overview" tab and click on the link to view the application.

## Packages Used 📦

### Server side :
| Dependency           | Description                                                 |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| bcryptjs             | Library for hashing and salting passwords                   |
| body-parser          | Middleware for parsing request bodies                       |
| cookie-parser        | Middleware for parsing cookies                              |
| cors                 | Middleware for enabling Cross-Origin Resource Sharing        |
| dotenv               | Library for loading environment variables from a file       |
| express              | Web application framework for Node.js                       |
| express-fileupload   | Middleware for handling file uploads                        |
| jsonwebtoken         | Library for generating and verifying JSON Web Tokens         |
| mongoose             | MongoDB object modeling tool for Node.js                    |
| multer               | Middleware for handling file uploads                        |
| nodemailer           | Library for sending emails                                  |
| cloudinary           | Cloud-based image and video management platform             |

### Clint-side : 

| Dependency                    | Description                                                     |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| @chakra-ui/icons              | Icon library for Chakra UI                                       |
| @chakra-ui/react              | UI component library for React with Chakra UI                    |
| @emotion/react                | Library for writing CSS styles with JavaScript                   |
| @emotion/styled               | Library for styling React components with Emotion                |
| @material-ui/core             | Material-UI component library for React                          |
| @material-ui/icons            | Material-UI icons package for React                              |
| @mui/icons-material           | Material-UI icons package for MUI (formerly Material-UI)         |
| @mui/material                 | UI component library for React with MUI (formerly Material-UI)   |
| axios                         | Promise-based HTTP client for the browser and Node.js            |
| framer-motion                 | Library for creating fluid animations in React                   |
| react                         | JavaScript library for building user interfaces                  |
| react-chips                   | React component for input chips                                  |
| react-dom                     | Entry point for React DOM rendering                              |
| react-helmet                  | Library for managing document head tags in React                 |
| react-lottie                  | Library for adding Lottie animations to React applications       |
| react-notification-badge      | Notification badge component for React                           |
| react-router-dom              | Routing library for React applications                           |
| react-scripts                 | Configuration and scripts for Create React App                   |
| react-scrollable-feed         | Scrollable feed component for React                              |
| socket.io-client              | Library for WebSocket communication in the browser              |
| styled-components             | Library for styling React components with CSS-in-JS              |

## Upcoming Features 🚀

 - AI Chat using Open Ai api
 - Dark mode
 - Audio and video calls
 - Rest password
 -  Media sharing
  -  And More ....
 
 ## Raise an issue for 📝
 
 - -   Found a bug
 - -   Add new service
 - -   For adding Upcoming Features
 - -   For Improving Documentation
 - -    And More ....
 
 ## Contribution Guidelines 🤝

 contributions are welcome! To contribute to ChatMind, follow these steps:
 
 - Fork the repository.
 - Create a new branch.
 - Make your changes.
 - Commit your changes.
 - Push to the branch.
 - Open a pull request.
 
  ## Contributors 🤝
  @MehraDevesh2022 

 
> Happy chatting with ChatMind! If you have any questions or need further assistance, feel free to reach out.
 




  
#   C h a t t i n g 
 
 

Commit message:

Fix backend stability, env config; frontend deps & rebrand

README.MD, after:

# Let's Chat - A Real-Time Chat Webapp.
---

Let's Chat is a full stack chat application that allows users to communicate with each other in real-time. It supports features like user authentication, one-on-one chat, group chat, user profile management, and more.

### If you find this project helpful, please consider giving it a star ⭐ and follow me on [GitHub](https://github.com/MehraDevesh2022) && [X](https://twitter.com/Iam_DEv22) for more exciting projects like this! 🚀

---
 
### ⚙️ &nbsp; Time Taken in Completion of Project : 
---
 <p align="center">
<a href="https://wakatime.com/badge/user/f7838f29-ea5b-42c9-a473-628c7d8bc934/project/27f6a565-9c39-4922-8a4e-343c26e814d4"><img src="https://wakatime.com/badge/user/f7838f29-ea5b-42c9-a473-628c7d8bc934/project/27f6a565-9c39-4922-8a4e-343c26e814d4.svg" alt="wakatime"></a>
</p>
 
**Tech Stack:**

[![MERN Stack](https://img.shields.io/badge/Stack-MERN-61DAFB?style=flat-square)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MERN_(software_bundle))
[![MongoDB](https://img.shields.io/badge/Database-MongoDB-47A248?style=flat-square)](https://www.mongodb.com/)
[![Express.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Backend-Express.js-000000?style=flat-square)](https://expressjs.com/)
[![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/Frontend-React-61DAFB?style=flat-square)](https://reactjs.org/)
[![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Backend-Node.js-339933?style=flat-square)](https://nodejs.org/)
[![Chakra UI](https://img.shields.io/badge/UI%20Framework-Chakra%20UI-319795?style=flat-square)](https://chakra-ui.com/)
[![CSS3](https://img.shields.io/badge/Styling-CSS3-1572B6?style=flat-square)](https://www.w3.org/Style/CSS/Overview.en.html)
[![Socket.IO](https://img.shields.io/badge/Web%20Sockets-Socket.IO-010101?style=flat-square)](https://socket.io/)

## Table of Contents 📜

 ## Demo 📸
![Demo](./gif/demo.gif)


## Table
- [Intro](#intro)
- [Sections](#sections)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Folder Structure](#folder-structure)
- [Setting Up .env in Backend](#setting-up-env-in-backend)
- [Hosting](#hosting)
- [Packages Used](#packages-used)
- [Upcoming Features](#upcoming-features)
- [Contribution Guidelines](#contribution-guidelines)

## Intro 📝

Let's Chat is a chat application built with the MERN stack. It provides a seamless and real-time chatting experience for users. With features like user authentication, one-on-one chat, group chat, and user profile management, Let's Chat offers a comprehensive solution for communication needs.

## Sections 🔖

- Home
  - Login Page
  - Sign Up Page
  - Forgot Password Page
- Chat Page
  - Search User
  - One-on-One Chat
  - Group Chat
  - User Profile
  - Group Menu





## Installation ⬇️

To run Let's Chat locally, you will need to have Git and Node.js installed on your machine.

### Git

Download and install Git from the official website: [https://git-scm.com/downloads](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

### Node.js

Download and install Node.js from the official website: [https://nodejs.org](https://nodejs.org)

## Getting Started 🎯

To get started with Let's Chat, follow these steps:

1. Fork and clone the repository from GitHub:
  
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/MehraDevesh2022/chat-mind.git
    ```


 ## Install the required packages for the backend by running the following command in the root directory:
 
   

    npm install 
    or 
    yarn add
  

## Install the required packages for the frontend by navigating to the frontend directory and running the following command:

  
    cd ./frontend 
    npm install
    or
    yarn add

## Run the backend server by running the following command in the root directory:
  
      npm start
      or
      yarn start

## Run the frontend server by navigating to the frontend directory and running the following command:
    
        cd ./frontend
        npm start
        or
        yarn start


        
    
## Folder Structure 📂

- backend
  - app.js
  - appUtils
    - error.js
    - jwtToken.js
  - controller
    - chatController.js
    - messageController.js
    - userController.js
  - db
    - connectDB.js
  - middleware
    - asyncWrapper.js
    - auth.js
    - errorHandler.js
  - model
    - ChatModel.js
    - MessageModel.js
    - UserModel.js
  - route
    - chatRoute.js
    - messageRoutes.js
    - userRoute.js
  - utils
    - .env
- frontend
  - build
    - asset-manifest.json
    - favicon.ico
    - index.html
    - logo192.png
    - logo512.png
    - manifest.json
    - robots.txt
  - public
    - favicon.ico
    - index.html
    - logo192.png
    - logo512.png
    - manifest.json
    - robots.txt
  - src
    - App.css
    - App.js
    - index.css
    - index.js
    - reportWebVitals.js 
  - animations 
    - typing.json 
  - components 
    - Chatbox.js 
    - ChatLoading.js 
    - EmojiOptions.js 
    - MyChats.js 
    - ScrollableChat.js 
    - SingleChat.js 
    - styles.css 
  - config 
    - ChatLogics.js 
  - Context 
    - ChatProvider.js 
  - img 
    - img.jpg 
  - Pages 
    - Chatpage.js 
    - Homepage.css 
    - Homepage.js

## Setting Up .env in Backend 🔧

To set up the environment variables for the backend, create a `.env` file inside the `backend/utills` directory (note: folder name is `utills` in this repo) with the following contents.
You can also copy `backend/utills/.env.example` to `backend/utills/.env`.

```bash

PORT=4000
DB_LINK=xxxx
JWT_SECRET=xxxx
JWT_EXPIRE=7d
COOKIE_EXPIRE=7

# Optional: allow cookies/credentials from frontend
CLIENT_ORIGIN=http://localhost:3000

# Cloudinary (required if you upload profile pictures)
CLOUDINARY_NAME=xxxx
CLOUDINARY_API_KEY=xxxx
CLOUDINARY_API_SECRET=xxxx
JWT_EXPIRE=2d
COOKIE_EXPIRE=2
NODE_ENV=production
CLOUDINARY_NAME=xxxx
API_KEY=xxxx
API_SECRET=xxxx
CLOUDINARY_URL=xxxx

```

 - Make sure to replace `xxxx` with your actual values. 

## Hosting 🌐 at Railway.

1. Go to [https://railway.app/](https://railway.app/).
   - This is the Railway platform where you can host your applications.

2. Log in using your GitHub account.
   - Click on the login option and authenticate with your GitHub credentials.

3. Start a New Project.
   - Once you are logged in, click on "Start a New Project."

4. Add your GitHub repository.
   - Choose the repository of your MERN stack app that you want to deploy.

5. Deploy your app.
   - After adding the repository, select the repository you want to deploy.

6. Configure environment variables.
   - If your app requires environment variables (such as API keys, database credentials, etc.), navigate to the variables section and enter them there.

7. Paste the `.env` file content.
   - If your app uses an `.env` file locally, copy and paste its contents into the Railway platform's environment variable section.

8. Generate the domain.
   - Go to the settings and generate a domain for your deployed app.

9. You're all set to go!
   - Your MERN stack app is now deployed and accessible using the generated domain.

- **Railway Platform**: [https://chat-mind-production.up.railway.app/signup)



## Hosting 🌐
ChatMind can be hosted using the Render platform. Follow these steps to deploy ChatMind:  [https://chat-mind-3pcx.onrender.com/](https://chat-mind-3pcx.onrender.com/)

 1. Build the frontend by running the following command in the frontend directory: `npm run build`
 2.  Add the following deployment code to the `app.js` file in the backend directory:  
 

 ```javascript 
  // -----deployment code----- 

const path = require("path");
const __dirname1 = path.resolve(); 
if (process.env.NODE_ENV === "production") {
  
   app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname1, "/frontend/build"))); 
   app.get("*", (req, res) => res.sendFile( path.resolve(__dirname1, "frontend", "build", "index.html") ) );

 }
 else {

  app.get("/", (req, res) => { res.send("API is running..");

   }); 
   }

  // -----deployment code ends-----
  ```
3 Push the code to a Git repository (GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket).
4 Sign up for Render and select "Web Services" from the dashboard.
5 Choose the repository from GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket.
6 Add a project name and select the runtime as Node.
7 Set the build command to npm install or yarn install.
8 Set the start command to node backend/app.js or npm start or yarn start.
9 Go to the "Advanced" tab and add all the environment keys and their corresponding values from the .env file.
10 Create the web service.
11 Once the web service is created, go to the "Overview" tab and click on the link to view the application.

## Packages Used 📦

### Server side :
| Dependency           | Description                                                 |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| bcryptjs             | Library for hashing and salting passwords                   |
| body-parser          | Middleware for parsing request bodies                       |
| cookie-parser        | Middleware for parsing cookies                              |
| cors                 | Middleware for enabling Cross-Origin Resource Sharing        |
| dotenv               | Library for loading environment variables from a file       |
| express              | Web application framework for Node.js                       |
| express-fileupload   | Middleware for handling file uploads                        |
| jsonwebtoken         | Library for generating and verifying JSON Web Tokens         |
| mongoose             | MongoDB object modeling tool for Node.js                    |
| multer               | Middleware for handling file uploads                        |
| nodemailer           | Library for sending emails                                  |
| cloudinary           | Cloud-based image and video management platform             |

### Clint-side : 

| Dependency                    | Description                                                     |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| @chakra-ui/icons              | Icon library for Chakra UI                                       |
| @chakra-ui/react              | UI component library for React with Chakra UI                    |
| @emotion/react                | Library for writing CSS styles with JavaScript                   |
| @emotion/styled               | Library for styling React components with Emotion                |
| @material-ui/core             | Material-UI component library for React                          |
| @material-ui/icons            | Material-UI icons package for React                              |
| @mui/icons-material           | Material-UI icons package for MUI (formerly Material-UI)         |
| @mui/material                 | UI component library for React with MUI (formerly Material-UI)   |
| axios                         | Promise-based HTTP client for the browser and Node.js            |
| framer-motion                 | Library for creating fluid animations in React                   |
| react                         | JavaScript library for building user interfaces                  |
| react-chips                   | React component for input chips                                  |
| react-dom                     | Entry point for React DOM rendering                              |
| react-helmet                  | Library for managing document head tags in React                 |
| react-lottie                  | Library for adding Lottie animations to React applications       |
| react-notification-badge      | Notification badge component for React                           |
| react-router-dom              | Routing library for React applications                           |
| react-scripts                 | Configuration and scripts for Create React App                   |
| react-scrollable-feed         | Scrollable feed component for React                              |
| socket.io-client              | Library for WebSocket communication in the browser              |
| styled-components             | Library for styling React components with CSS-in-JS              |

## Upcoming Features 🚀

 - AI Chat using Open Ai api
 - Dark mode
 - Audio and video calls
 - Rest password
 -  Media sharing
  -  And More ....
 
 ## Raise an issue for 📝
 
 - -   Found a bug
 - -   Add new service
 - -   For adding Upcoming Features
 - -   For Improving Documentation
 - -    And More ....
 
 ## Contribution Guidelines 🤝

 contributions are welcome! To contribute to ChatMind, follow these steps:
 
 - Fork the repository.
 - Create a new branch.
 - Make your changes.
 - Commit your changes.
 - Push to the branch.
 - Open a pull request.
 
  ## Contributors 🤝
  @MehraDevesh2022 

 
> Happy chatting with ChatMind! If you have any questions or need further assistance, feel free to reach out.
 




  
#   C h a t t i n g 
 
 
